9/9/16

I. Animal Digestion
Nutrients
    Trace Nutrients
        Vitamins
        Minerals (Zinc, Iron)
-Once food is acquired food is mechanically processed
-After mechanical processing food is chemically processed in enzymes and acids
so that it can be used for energy.
    -Extracelluar digestion: chemical processing that takes places in the body
    but outside cells
        -Takes places in a thin piece of tissues that covers a structure or
        lines a cavity (galnds digestive epithlia)
        -Digestive juices
        -All animals use this
    -Intracellular digestion: chunks of food are engulfed by cells through
    endocytosis and packaged in digestive vacuoles
      -Only simple animals use intracellular digestion
-AFterfood is process mechanically and chemically food is absorbed across
the digestive epithelia which typically has a greatly enlarged surface
(exchange surface).
-Exchange surfaces always have an interface with the circulatory system for
distribution.
-Finally undigested waste is eliminated.

II. Digestive Systems: Structural View
  A. Digestive  Cavity = gastrovascular civility
    1.Hydra
    2. Flatworm
      a.These animals are built like a sack with only a single opening
        i. Both food and waste traverse the same opening
        ii. Digestive skin that lines the  gastrovascular cavity is .....
        iii. Gland cells release enzymes to chemically process food
        (extracellular)
        iv. can not chew
        v. two types of cell in the gastrovascular: one for secretion of
        digestive juices and one for abortion

    B. Digestive Track = food moves in one direction
      1. Tube within a tube
      2. Food enters through the mouth, is deconstructed, and exits through the
      anus
        i. Mouth, esophagus, crop (storage so more food can be collected before
        it is processed), gizzard (muscualar organ that future mechanically
        processed food), stomach, intestine (furthuer processed and absorbed)
III. Herbivores: Animals that feed on mostly plants
  A. Problems using plants as food
    1. Plants have indigestible cell wall made of cellulose (no animals have
    enzymes to break down cellulose)
    2.Leaves and stems are less calorie dense and protein dense than animals
    3. Plants have defense (spices, aromatic, nutmeg), sutural defenses
    (spines, crystals)
  B. Chemical Processing
    1. Microorganisms in a cow digest sugar and breakdown fat to produces
    various absorbable products but also a lot of methane (greenhouse gas).
    2. Rabbits use cecotropes

9/12/16
I. Metabolism: Food + 0_2 -> Energy + Nutrients + wastes
  A. 10^4 years ago - reducing atmosphere (little 0_2)
    1. Photosynthesis (C0_2 + H_20 -> sugars + 0_2)
      i. Energy stored as ATP
  B. Metabolic Pathways (both used in humans)
      1. Anaerobic pathway (no 0_2) - glycolysis and fermentation
        i. 1 glucose / 2ATP
        ii. Used in humans as bust activity
      2. Aerobic Pathway (0_2) - Citric acid cycle and electron transport chain
        ii. 1 glucose / 34 ATP
  C. Structures
    1. Acquisition of 0-2
      A. Mechanism of 0_2 Acquisition
        1. Diffusion - movement of molecules from one place to another as a
        result of their internal heat energy
        2. Diffusion for 0_2 always occurs across a body surface
        3. No active transport
          i. Factors that affect rate of diffusion
            1. Concentration difference - solutes always move from an area of
            high contention to an area of low concentration
            2. Area across which diffusion occurs - bigger surface area ->
            faster diffusion
            3. Density of the medium (physical environment)
            4. Oxygen availability
              a. air 21% 0_2
              b. water 1% 0_2 (warm water hold less 0_2 than cold water) (sea
              water hold less 0_2 than fresh water) (animals also deplete 0_2 in
              their immediate surroundings)
       2. Respiratory Surfaces
             A. Unoccupied Surface
              1. Diffusion across body surface is sufficient if no cell is no
              cell is more than .5mm from the surface
                i. No specialized respiratory system required if the animal is
                very small < 1mm diameter or very flat
              2. Ventilation - brings fresh medium (higher concentration of 0_2)
              to the respiratory surface
              3. Body size and Evolution of Specialized Respiratory Surfaces
                i. Always wet because and inside a body cavity 0_2 must be in
                solution in the body
                ii. Large surface area / mulit-layered (alveoli in mammals)
                iii. Thin wall (usually 1 cell thick) so that 0_2 does not need
                to travel for to get into the circulatory system
                iv. In most animals tightly connected to the circulatory system
                (well vascularized). Animals ventilate outside of the surface and
                perfusions carries 0_2 away from the surface. Perfusion is the
                movement of 0_2 away from the respiratory system, thereby
                reducing the concentration of 0_2 in the respiratory tissue.
                This increase the rate of diffusion of 0_2 in to the respiratory
                system.
                v. Countercurrent Exchanger - structures in which fluids flow in
                opposite directions on wither side of a membrane to maintain a
                large concentration gradient (opposite of concurrent)
            3. Pay attention to insect tracheal system*
            4. Pay attention to respiratory system of birds*
    2. Destitution of 0_2
    3. Utilization (cellular metabolism)
9/14/15
-Pressure in a chamber varies inversely with volume
-Positive or negative pressure is created in a respiratory chambers
-Fish  use a two step process (one way flow)
  1. Mouth open / operculum closed / pharynx expands
  2. Mouth closed / operculum open / pharynx contracts
-Nostrils are values that can be opened and closed
-The glottis is a values between the pharynx and the lungs
-Frogs (and other reptiles) have a 4 step ventilation process
  1. Lowers the floor of the mouth inhales through the nostrils
  2. Closes nostrils, opens glottis, and elevates the floor of the mouth,
  forcing air into the lungs
  3.Rythmic ventilation assists in gas exchange
  4. Air is forced out when muscles in the body wall above the lungs contract
  and the lungs recoil elastically.
-Mammals have a two step system because the diaphragm controls in the info and
out flow of air
  -Lungs are held within the thoracic cavity
  -When the diaphragm contracts the pressure in the thoracic cavity decrease
  and the lungs fill passively
  -Intercostal muscles assists
  -The rising diaphragm reduces the size of the thoracic cavity and increases
  the pressure
-Read about birds
